.\" t
.\"     Title: libttaR_misc
.\"    Author: Shane Seelig
.\"      Date: 2025-12-24
.\"    Source: libttaR 2.1
.\"  Language: English
.\"
.\" ##########################################################################

.TH "LIBTTAr_MISC" "3" "2025\-12\-24" "libttaR 2.1" \
"LibTTAr Programmer's Manual"

.\" ##########################################################################

.SH "NAME"
libttaR_misc \- miscellaneous functions and objects

.\" ##########################################################################

.SH "SYNOPSIS"

.nf
.B #include <libttaR.h>

.BI "int libttaR_test_nchan(unsigned int " nchan ");
.BI "size_t libttaR_nsamples_perframe_tta1(size_t " samplerate ");
.BI "size_t libttaR_ttabuf_safety_margin(
.RS 8
.BI "enum LibTTAr_Samplebytes " samplebytes ", unsigned int " nchan "
.RE
.BI );
.BI "size_t libttaR_codecstate_priv_size(unsigned int " nchan ");

.BI "const struct LibTTAr_VersionInfo libttaR_info;"
.fi

.\" ##########################################################################

.SH "DESCRIPTION"

.BR libttaR_test_nchan (3)
tests whether the library was built to support \fInchan\fR audio channels.

.BR libttaR_nsamples_perframe_tta1 (3)
calculates the number of samples in a TTA1 frame for a given \fIsamplerate\fR.

.BR libttaR_ttabuf_safety_margin (3)
calculates a safety-margin size for padding the TTA buffer in order to prevent
a possible buffer overrun.
The calculated size is greater than the maximum number of TTA bytes that could
be encoded for one PCM sample with \fInchan\fR channels.
When decoding, the padding is needed in case the TTA data is corrupted or
malformed.
Not using this function may result in a \fBLIBTTAr_RET_INVAL_BOUNDS\fR
return from a codec function if the TTA buffer length is too small.

.BR libttaR_codecstate_priv_size (3)
calculates the size of a private state struct with \fInchan\fR audio channels.
The returned size is suitable for passing to
.BR aligned_alloc (3).

.RS 4
.EX
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <libttaR.h>

/*@only@*/ /*@null@*/
LibTTAr_CodecState_Priv *
priv_alloc(const unsigned int nchan)
/*@globals	internalState@*/
/*@modifies	internalState@*/
{
	const size_t size = libttaR_codecstate_priv_size(nchan);

	if ( size == 0 ){
		return NULL;
	}
	return aligned_alloc(LIBTTAr_CODECSTATE_PRIV_ALIGN, size);
}
.EE
.RE

.BR libttaR_info
is a read-only object containing the library's version information.

.RS 4
.nf
\fBstruct LibTTAr_VersionInfo\fR {
    unsigned int       version;
    unsigned int       version_major;   /* API change               */
    unsigned int       version_minor;   /* bugfix or improvement    */
    unsigned int       version_revis;	/* inbetween minor versions */
    const char        *version_extra;
    const char        *version_date;
    const char        *copyright;
    const char        *license;
};
.fi
.RE

.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------------#

.SS Arguments

\fInchan\fR
.RS 8
The number of audio channels in the PCM.
.RE

\fIsamplerate\fR
.RS 8
The audio sampling frequency in samples-per-second.
.RE

\fIsamplebytes\fR
.RS 8
The number of bytes per samples in the originally sized PCM.

.nf
\fBenum LibTTAr_SampleBytes\fR {
    LIBTTAr_SAMPLEBYTES_1   = 1u,
    LIBTTAr_SAMPLEBYTES_2   = 2u,
    LIBTTAr_SAMPLEBYTES_3   = 3u
};
.fi
.RE

.\" ##########################################################################

.SH "RETURN VALUE"

.BR libttaR_test_nchan (3)
.RS 8
Non-0 on success.
.RE

.BR libttaR_nsamples_perframe_tta1 (3)
.RS 8
The number of samples in a TTA1 frame.
.RE

.BR libttaR_ttabuf_safety_margin (3)
.RS 8
How much to pad the TTA buffer by.
.RE

.BR libttaR_codecstate_priv_size (3)
.RS 8
The size of a private state struct.
.RE

.\" ##########################################################################

.SH "ERRORS"

0 - bad parameter or integer overflow.

The debug build of the library may abort instead of returning an error.

.\" ##########################################################################

.SH "ATTRIBUTES"

All are MT-Safe.

.\" ##########################################################################

.SH "SEE ALSO"

.BR libttaR_tta_encode (3),
.BR libttaR_tta_decode (3),
.BR libttaR_pcm_read (3),
.BR libttaR_pcm_write (3),
.BR libttaR_crc32 (3)

.\" ##########################################################################

.SH "AUTHOR"

.B "Shane Seelig"
.RS 4
Developer
.RE

.\" EOF ######################################################################
